README.md, before:

# BigQuery MCP Server

A production-ready Model Context Protocol server that provides secure, cross-project access to BigQuery datasets. Built with FastMCP for Python, enabling LLMs to explore data, analyze schemas, and execute queries across multiple Google Cloud projects.

## Key Features

- **Cross-Project Access** - Query data across multiple BigQuery projects with a single connection
- **Advanced Analytics** - Column-level analysis for nulls, cardinality, and data quality
- **Safety Controls** - SQL validation, query limits, and read-only operations
- **Token Optimization** - Compact response formats designed for LLM efficiency
- **Flexible Configuration** - YAML-based project and dataset access control
- **Docker Support** - Containerized deployment for easy integration

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+
- Google Cloud SDK with BigQuery access
- Docker (optional, for containerized deployment)

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/aicayzer/bigquery-mcp.git
   cd bigquery-mcp
   ```

2. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. **Configure authentication:**
   ```bash
   # Option 1: Application Default Credentials (recommended)
   gcloud auth application-default login

   # Option 2: Service Account (for production)
   export GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=/path/to/service-account.json
   ```

4. **Set up configuration:**
   ```bash
   cp config/config.yaml.example config/config.yaml
   # Edit config.yaml with your project details
   ```

5. **Run the server:**
   ```bash
   python src/server.py
   ```

### Docker Deployment

```bash
# Build and run with Docker Compose
docker-compose up --build

# Alternatively, force rebuild without cache
docker-compose build --no-cache
docker-compose up
```

## Available Tools

The server provides 6 core tools for BigQuery interaction:

### Discovery Tools
- **`list_projects()`** - List configured BigQuery projects
- **`list_datasets(project)`** - List datasets in a project
- **`list_tables(dataset, table_type)`** - List tables in a dataset

### Analysis Tools
- **`analyze_table(table)`** - Get table structure and statistics
- **`analyze_columns(table, columns, include_examples, sample_size)`** - Deep column analysis

### Query Execution
- **`execute_query(query, format, max_rows, timeout, dry_run, parameters)`** - Execute SELECT queries

## Integration Examples

### Claude Desktop

For complete setup instructions with Claude Desktop (Docker and Python options), see the **[Claude Desktop Setup Guide](docs/claude-desktop-setup.md)**.

Quick configuration example:
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "bigquery": {
      "command": "python",
      "args": ["/path/to/bigquery-mcp/src/server.py"],
      "env": {
        "GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS": "/path/to/credentials.json"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Cursor IDE with Docker

For detailed setup instructions with Cursor IDE using Docker, see the [Cursor MCP Setup Guide](docs/cursor-mcp-setup.md).

## Documentation

📚 **[Complete Documentation](docs/index.md)** - Full documentation site

- **[Installation Guide](docs/installation.md)** - Detailed installation and setup
- **[Configuration Guide](docs/configuration.md)** - YAML configuration and environment variables
- **[Tools Reference](docs/tools.md)** - Complete tool documentation with examples
- **[Development Guide](docs/development.md)** - Contributing and development setup

### Building Documentation Locally

```bash
# Install documentation dependencies
pip install mkdocs mkdocs-material

# Serve documentation locally
mkdocs serve

# Open http://localhost:8000 in your browser
```

## Testing

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=src tests/

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/unit/test_discovery.py
```

## Development

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
ruff format src tests

# Check and fix linting issues
ruff check src tests --fix
```

For detailed development setup, see the [Development Guide](docs/development.md).

## Security & Safety

- **Read-only operations** - Only SELECT queries and CTEs (WITH clauses) are allowed
- **SQL validation** - Configurable banned keywords and safety checks
- **Query limits** - Row limits, timeouts, and byte processing limits
- **Project isolation** - Access control via YAML configuration
- **No credentials in code** - Uses Google Cloud authentication

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see the [Development Guide](docs/development.md) for details on:

- Setting up a development environment
- Code style guidelines
- Testing requirements
- Pull request process

## Support

- 📖 [Documentation](docs/index.md)
- 🐛 [Issue Tracker](https://github.com/aicayzer/bigquery-mcp/issues)
- 💬 [Discussions](https://github.com/aicayzer/bigquery-mcp/discussions)

Commit message:

feat: Add comprehensive development environment setup
🏗️ Development Environment:
- docker-compose.dev.yml - Separate dev server configuration
- config/config.dev.yaml - Independent development configuration
- setup-dev.sh - Automated development environment setup script
- docs/development-environment.md - Complete setup and usage guide

🔧 Enhanced Server Configuration:
- Added CONFIG_FILE environment variable support in server.py
- Development server uses separate container name: bigquery-mcp-dev-server
- Debug logging and enhanced error messages for development
- Independent configuration from production server

📚 Documentation:
- Updated README.md with development environment section
- RELEASE_NOTES_v1.1.0.md - Clean summary of v1.1.0 improvements
- Comprehensive development workflow documentation

✨ Benefits:
- Safe testing of changes without affecting production
- Separate MCP server instances (bigquery vs bigquery-dev)
- Independent configuration for dev projects/settings
- Enhanced debugging and logging for development
- Easy switching between prod and dev in MCP clients
- No conflicts between development and production

🎯 Usage:
- ./setup-dev.sh - Set up development environment
- docker-compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up -d - Start dev server
- Add 'bigquery-dev' server to MCP clients for testing

All tests passing (49/49). Ready for clean development workflow.

README.md, after:

# BigQuery MCP Server

A production-ready Model Context Protocol server that provides secure, cross-project access to BigQuery datasets. Built with FastMCP for Python, enabling LLMs to explore data, analyze schemas, and execute queries across multiple Google Cloud projects.

## Key Features

- **Cross-Project Access** - Query data across multiple BigQuery projects with a single connection
- **Advanced Analytics** - Column-level analysis for nulls, cardinality, and data quality
- **Safety Controls** - SQL validation, query limits, and read-only operations
- **Token Optimization** - Compact response formats designed for LLM efficiency
- **Flexible Configuration** - YAML-based project and dataset access control
- **Docker Support** - Containerized deployment for easy integration

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+
- Google Cloud SDK with BigQuery access
- Docker (optional, for containerized deployment)

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository:**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/aicayzer/bigquery-mcp.git
   cd bigquery-mcp
   ```

2. **Install dependencies:**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. **Configure authentication:**
   ```bash
   # Option 1: Application Default Credentials (recommended)
   gcloud auth application-default login

   # Option 2: Service Account (for production)
   export GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=/path/to/service-account.json
   ```

4. **Set up configuration:**
   ```bash
   cp config/config.yaml.example config/config.yaml
   # Edit config.yaml with your project details
   ```

5. **Run the server:**
   ```bash
   python src/server.py
   ```

### Docker Deployment

```bash
# Build and run with Docker Compose
docker-compose up --build

# Alternatively, force rebuild without cache
docker-compose build --no-cache
docker-compose up
```

## Available Tools

The server provides 6 core tools for BigQuery interaction:

### Discovery Tools
- **`list_projects()`** - List configured BigQuery projects
- **`list_datasets(project)`** - List datasets in a project
- **`list_tables(dataset, table_type)`** - List tables in a dataset

### Analysis Tools
- **`analyze_table(table)`** - Get table structure and statistics
- **`analyze_columns(table, columns, include_examples, sample_size)`** - Deep column analysis

### Query Execution
- **`execute_query(query, format, max_rows, timeout, dry_run, parameters)`** - Execute SELECT queries

## Integration Examples

### Claude Desktop

For complete setup instructions with Claude Desktop (Docker and Python options), see the **[Claude Desktop Setup Guide](docs/claude-desktop-setup.md)**.

Quick configuration example:
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "bigquery": {
      "command": "python",
      "args": ["/path/to/bigquery-mcp/src/server.py"],
      "env": {
        "GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS": "/path/to/credentials.json"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Cursor IDE with Docker

For detailed setup instructions with Cursor IDE using Docker, see the [Cursor MCP Setup Guide](docs/cursor-mcp-setup.md).

## Documentation

📚 **[Complete Documentation](docs/index.md)** - Full documentation site

- **[Installation Guide](docs/installation.md)** - Detailed installation and setup
- **[Configuration Guide](docs/configuration.md)** - YAML configuration and environment variables
- **[Tools Reference](docs/tools.md)** - Complete tool documentation with examples
- **[Development Guide](docs/development.md)** - Contributing and development setup

### Building Documentation Locally

```bash
# Install documentation dependencies
pip install mkdocs mkdocs-material

# Serve documentation locally
mkdocs serve

# Open http://localhost:8000 in your browser
```

## Testing

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=src tests/

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/unit/test_discovery.py
```

## Development

### Development Environment

For ongoing development and testing, you can set up a separate development MCP server:

```bash
# Set up development environment
./setup-dev.sh

# Start development server
docker-compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up -d
```

This gives you:
- Separate development MCP server alongside production
- Debug logging and enhanced error messages  
- Independent configuration for development projects
- Easy testing of latest changes without affecting production

See the **[Development Environment Guide](docs/development-environment.md)** for complete setup instructions.

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
ruff format src tests

# Check and fix linting issues
ruff check src tests --fix
```

For detailed development setup, see the [Development Guide](docs/development.md).

## Security & Safety

- **Read-only operations** - Only SELECT queries and CTEs (WITH clauses) are allowed
- **SQL validation** - Configurable banned keywords and safety checks
- **Query limits** - Row limits, timeouts, and byte processing limits
- **Project isolation** - Access control via YAML configuration
- **No credentials in code** - Uses Google Cloud authentication

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see the [Development Guide](docs/development.md) for details on:

- Setting up a development environment
- Code style guidelines
- Testing requirements
- Pull request process

## Support

- 📖 [Documentation](docs/index.md)
- 🐛 [Issue Tracker](https://github.com/aicayzer/bigquery-mcp/issues)
- 💬 [Discussions](https://github.com/aicayzer/bigquery-mcp/discussions)
